---
title: Science, Art + Community
author: Justin Lynn Reid
date: '2018-03-22'
slug: art-science-community
categories: []
tags: []
comments: no
showcomments: yes
showpagemeta: yes
---

Hello World! This post is the first for my data science blog, and I thought that I would never be able to create my own self-hosted blog in a relatively simple way. I would like to thank the R community for providing such an opportunity with [R Blogdown](https://bookdown.org/yihui/blogdown/) and it further proves that the R community is one of the most welcoming in data science and shows what true collaboration is supposed to be.

Following that idea community is one of the reasons that I have chosen [data science](https://datajobs.com/what-is-data-science) following my career in meteorology and atmospheric science. Since meteorology is such a small field not many people understand its upsides and downsides but here I would like to elaborate simply a little on the challenges & changes in my career and why a transition from meteorology into the data science industry made sense from both a professional and creative perspective.

Not many people understand that despite being a hard science degree that requires many years of advanced mathematics and research, the science of meteorology has career issues that are in many ways unique to other scientific professions. There are of course the regular issues of [funding](https://www.npr.org/2018/03/02/589845319/national-weather-service-forecast-cloudy-with-a-chance-of-budget-cuts) and the [reproducibility crisis](http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2017/02/how-culture-clash-noaa-led-flap-over-high-profile-warming-pause-study), but in meteorology there are also unique problems in both professional opportunities and pay. In fact the entry level job for the National Weather Service on average only pays $33,000 a year and if you want to be promoted to a better position you many times have to move to another office on the other side of the country. Broadcast and research don't provide much better opportunities either, with the former having starting salaries around 19K in small markets. You can read the full story about all of the issues surrounding meteorology [here](https://medium.com/@tmarquiswx/an-honest-conversation-about-early-career-professions-in-meteorology-704f8071d605).

What I wanted to do in meteorology was that I wanted to be a PhD meteorologist out in Oklahoma researching severe weather. I've wanted to be a meteorologist since I was 5 years old and I got my basic and advanced [SKYWARN](https://www.weather.gov/skywarn/) severe weather spotter certifications from the National Weather Service when I was 10. However after I got my degree in atmospheric science I was rejected from both of my graduate school choices and I decided to go on ahead an start working in industry in Oklahoma. But instead of research or weather forecasting I ended up going down another way, meteorological programming. At first it was applied meteorology using programming, however over time the role transitioned into what was essentially data engineering with a focus in meteorology and GIS. It was at this point that I began to understand that meteorology was becoming data science and with the other industry issues mentioned above going on, I then started to shift my focus in that direction. It just made sense. The Internet of Things were Earth Observing Systems at a higher spatial and temporal density, machine learning and other techniques used the math that I had learned for my degree, and at that point I almost had three years of experience working with messy data and putting data transformation code into production data pipelines. It was at that point when I caught in a round of layoffs at my former company and was out of work for a while. After those difficult times I was then hired as a contractor for [NOAA's NCEI](https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/) back in my former college town working on an environmental data search engine called [NOAA OneStop](https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/news/ncei-launches-noaa-onestop). It was at this point where I was no longer doing meteorological programming, but was doing data engineering full time, just at a government climate organization. From there my career direction was cemented and that is where I am at today.

Given all of these experiences do I regret going into meteorology? Absolutely not and what's ironic is that atmospheric science is a unique enough domain to stand out in the data science market. Though even more than that I still got to live out my dream of working in Oklahoma as a meteorologist for 2 years before things turned out the way they did. Even though I don't feel that bad things happen for a reason I wouldn't have it any other way. And after what happened I've come to see things in a way that I never though possible before.

Ever since I was little I've always liked to see things in a creative way. Where I would like to see all the different things that were possible. As my career in atmospheric science kept going on I felt like those times become so very distant. Where the realities of hierarchy, the job market, and other forces made that early enthusiasm seem wrong. However in the field of data science, and especially open data science, I feel that those early times have started to come back. Outside of data science and meteorology I feel deeply connected to art and I like to write poetry in my spare time. Now when I see that there is such openness, where you can literally learn the newest techniques while engaging a supportive community, and not be so stressed to get everything right the first time, it fills me with the purpose that I should've had all along. Where the support and willingness to do unexpected things of art combine with the clarity of science have forged a new way of doing things. And I feel that way is the right one for who I am. It always has been.
